---
title: Tango & revolution | 2001
navtitle: So You Think You Want a Revolution
chapter: '01'
slug: 06_bigtrouble
parent: 01_index
nick: 6big_trouble
date: 2001-12-21
---

# So You Think You Want a Revolution...

**Thu Dec 20, 2001 6:15pm:** I'm ashamed of what I did this afternoon. I've heard that when the Mexican Revolution began, a bunch of people in El Paso impulsively ran across the border and joined in. Several people have emailed and given support and good wishes, which is very kind, but I'm afraid it's wasted on someone who puts himself at risk for no reason ... which is exactly what I did this afternoon. Whether it was boredom, bravado, or just because it was too noisy and hot to take a nap in this old apartment, I went against everyone's advice, and decided to walk around BA and find out what was happening. I was going to take the subway, pop up, and then escape back home if it was too dangerous. But, the _subte_ was barricaded, so I ended up walking from _Independencia_ up _Entre Rios_, to _Congreso_, then into the center of town past the _Obelisco_, and down _Diagonal Saenz Pena_ to within one block of _Plaza de Mayo_. After that, I began running, became disoriented, and I ended up back on _Av. de Mayo_, which was a bad place to be. I then went west to _Nueve de Julio_ thinking I was getting out of it, and it got worse. It is the stupidest thing I have ever done in my life. I thought for several hours before deciding to write this, but I did what I did ... so here it is. I'll write about it in the present tense because it's easier:

Everything seems normal on the street as I approach the Congress building at _Hipolito Yrigoyen_ & _Combate de los Pozos_, but it changes fast. There is a police roadblock two blocks south of the _Congreso_, but I see a few other people are able to pass when the police aren't looking, so I wait and I'm able to slip by also. People approaching me from the other direction look like they are crying. In my naiveté I think it's because they are upset. Next I see something a little scary. Muscular men in civilian clothes are piling out of private cars along the curb where I walk, and they're putting on flack jackets, and taking shotguns and automatic rifles out of the trunks of their cars. They are obviously soldiers or police of some kind, and the fact that they are dressed in jeans and t-shirts somehow makes them even more intimidating. They ignore me as I walk by, and I walk right up to the corner across from the Congress.

{% include pix.html
src='1_pics/image009.jpg'
width='450' height='273'
caption='Riot police on Diagonal Roca Saenz Pena, Buenos Aires'
%}

The teargas is strong here and I realize why I thought people were crying. I turn right, which is upwind, to get away from the gas, and I head east along the south side of _Plaza Congreso_. I hang out here, but I'm in the open and very exposed, so I decide to move across into the plaza and sit on a bench facing the Congress a block away to see what happens. There are demonstrators in groups on the corners, and I am facing a very large contingent of riot police surrounding the building. Sidewalk tiles have been pulled up to make projectiles. Fires are burning in the streets, and they smell horrible -- there is no wood here, just garbage and plastic garbage containers to burn. There are only a few benches in the park because people have put them in the street to use as barricades. I'm in a somewhat precarious spot, but I try to maintain a low profile and see what will happen, because there are a couple of other people sitting around in the plaza as well. There is the incongruous sight of some businessmen in suits and briefcases, and even a few families hurrying across the plaza with children. After a few minutes there are two explosions at the northeast corner of the building, and people begin to run along _Rivadavia_ which borders the north side of the plaza, about 100 feet from me. Then, about five motorcycles, with two policemen in riot gear on each rush along _Rivadavia_ past me chasing the people. The people scatter, and I think the cops riding shotgun on the back may be firing teargas or rubber bullets, but my head is down and I can't see. I start to run south to get away, but I quickly change my mind when they stop chasing the people, and turn right, to pass behind me. I am now in the position of having a large army of riot police in front of me, and the motorcycle police behind me. I feel very cut off and exposed, but if I continue to run south, I'll be running parallel to motorcycles, and then into them if they turn back to the Congress, (which is exactly what they do). So I casually return to my bench, and try to be invisible.

A few minutes later there are two very loud explosions at the southeast corner of the building, where I had just passed about 15 minutes before. All of the thousands of pigeons in the park take off together in a huge flock. There is some smoke from the explosions, so I decide it's time to leave. I move north on _Montevideo_ (the street signs are torn down, but I looked it up on the map after), and I pass a very large guy standing in the middle of the intersection. There is debris everywhere, and for some reason he is holding the wheel of a car. He glares at me furiously, like he wants to heave it at me. Then things settle a little as I approach _Corrientes_. There are lots of working people here, and I think they're trapped because there are no taxis, and the _subte_ is down, but there are some buses that are packed, and some private cars stalled in traffic. I see people going down into the subway entrances and pleading with the people behind the metal doors to let them in. I have to be careful because the always-dangerous BA traffic is even worse because everyone is so worked up.

I walk east on _Corrientes_ to the _Obelisco_ at the center of town. There are now more demonstrators than office workers trying escape. I cross _Nueve de Julio_ and look down _Diagonal Saenz Pena_, towards the _Casa Rosada_. It is a sight I'll never forget. The street disappears into dirty ugly gray smoke about three blocks down, and it is filled with people moving towards me like a retreating army. There are banners, and I remember seeing one from the Socialists, and a huge red Communist one. The subway stop at _Suipacha_ by _Confiteria Ideal_ has so much smoke and gas that I can hardly breathe, but I continue on anyway. I'm heading towards the _Plaza de Mayo_, and the _Casa Rosada_, the center of their government, but everyone else is walking past me in the opposite direction. I'm able to go three more blocks, but I'm coughing a lot. Now there are only hard-core demonstrators or desperate poor people. I don't know who they are, but there are no middle class office-workers, just hard looking people, many without shirts. It's hot and muggy, and most have shirts wrapped around their faces and over their heads. I see a shirtless guy with his face covered attacking the _Banco Rio_ bank at _Esmeralda_, which has iron shutters. First he breaks the plastic sign over the sidewalk with a long board, setting off the alarms. As I move across the street to pass and avoid him, he picks up chunks of concrete, and begins throwing, breaking out the windows on the upper floors. As I walk I pass groups of people, and then there are places where there is no one. I'm completely alone on the wide debris strewn street- by myself, in the middle of one of the busiest, most densely populated places in the world on a weekday afternoon. It makes me nervous, and I keep thinking I need to turn back- but also it seems like history is being made, so I keep going, wanting to see what's happening in the _Plaza de Mayo_.

Then it gets even worse. A guy appears out of the smoke with a bowling ball sized chunk of concrete. He runs towards some glass windows in front of me, and smashes it against the strong glass. Incredibly, it bounces off- and I run into the street to avoid it. The smoke is terrible, and I hold my T-shirt up over my face. I've had enough, I'm less than a block from Plaza de Mayo, but I can go no further. The smoke is thick, and the only people are crazed looking guys with tattoos, either standing in groups, or smashing at the front of the buildings, their faces wrapped. Chunks of concrete are bouncing off the upper floors of the buildings as they aim for unprotected windows up high. I'm afraid I'm going to get hit as they ricochet around the street. The whole time I feel absolutely no fear from these people. I feel close to them, and they seem like brothers in a strange way. They are very angry, but not at me. There is a helicopter circling overhead (which is unusual, because you normally don't see them in BA). I turn south, wanting to get away. This moves me toward _Ave. de Mayo_ again, but it is a mistake because I see more rocks flying there (I think I was on _Maipu_). The street here is narrower, and everything is torn up. There are barricades at each corner with fires smoldering. There are no vehicles of any kind, but then I see a truck pulled up on the sidewalk. I stupidly think the men must be working on something as I elbow my way through them- but after I pass I realize they are looters who have been able to break into the front of one of the buildings. But how will they ever be able to get the truck out of these streets after they load it?

Now I'm in a place that is virtually deserted, and it feels very claustrophobic. There's no place to run, and it is still very difficult to breath. I start to panic a little, and on one narrow street a frightened woman runs past me (I think she has just escaped from one of the besieged buildings), and then a larger group runs by, looking back over their shoulders. A man runs into me, says "_disculpe_", and says something about "_rompian todo_" ("they break everything"). I look back. I can't see anything, but suddenly I begin to run, turning corners, and becoming disoriented. Finally, I see _Avenida 9 de Julio_ to the west and jog toward it because it's open space, and it's away from the _Casa Rosada_, where I think the worst is. I intersect it somewhere around _Rivadavia_, south of the _Obelisco_. The scene looks like some sort of medieval battlefield, with bands of people roaming and running on the far side of the avenue, and I seem to be almost alone on the east side. I think there are also groups of mounted police, and armored vehicles. They say _Nueve de Julio_ is the widest avenue in the world, and I don't want to cross that wide-open space alone- but suddenly I really want to get home, and there's no way I can go back into those narrow smoke filled streets to the east.

So I take a deep breath, and walk quickly across to the other side. I don't like being out in the open exposed, and it seems to take forever, but I make it. Then, just as I arrive at what I feel is the safety of the crowd on the other side, there is a popping, hissing sound. The police must be very close, because a smoking missile goes up from a side street, and arcs overhead. Everyone tries to run north along the west side of _9 de Julio_ (_Lima Cerrito_), but people are tripping and falling. The thing lands very close and explodes, and we are in gas. There is burning deep into my lungs, and I can't see. My face feels like it's on fire, like a very bad sunburn. There is water squirting from a broken pipe on the grass of the wide avenue, and a those of us hit by the missile run to it and fall on our knees, taking turns splashing water into our eyes and faces. I am scrambling around with about ten or fifteen people. Our skin is on fire, and we are on our hands and knees, trying to get at the water. I can see legs running past us. When I can I splash water all over my head and face, but the gas is still very strong. A bunch of us begin to run again, struggling to the north, hardly able to see. I think police are moving somewhere, because the crowd is moving, but I can't see them. I finally turn west onto a side street, and it is more or less over. I'm not the only one who's had enough, because a lot of the people with me are young shirtless people, coughing and crying from the gas, and moving away to what appears to be a safer area -- the streets to the west, away from _Av. Julio_ and _Casa Rosada_. I walk the several miles back home shaken, giving the _Congreso_ area a wide berth. I look down the toward the Congress building as I cross _Av. Mayo_, however, and I see a lot of smoke. It's still not safe, but it's much better than what I was in. I pass several large groups of police, but I don't look at them.

{% include pix.html
src='1_pics/image010.jpg'
alt='Congreso'
width='550' height='307'
%}

I guess part of the reason I went out is to report what I saw, but now I feel very foolish about it. I've always made fun of Geraldo Rivera, but at least he gets paid to do what he does. When I got home, Renee was leaving for the airport. Malena was going to take her, but we decided to hire a car because it was too dangerous. Ricardo Vidort came by to check on us. He told me he was unable to get home in the taxi last night, and had to stay at a friend's house. He said he would accompany her to the airport to protect her. After she left, Malena fell apart and couldn't stop crying. She hasn't been sleeping well for several weeks because of all this, and Renee was like her sister. She talks tough, but now that she feels her country falling apart it's too much. I walked down the block to pick up the laundry, and told the man where I had been. He says, "You have seen a revolution."

How do I feel? Stupid for what I did, but very glad to be safe at home. I love Buenos Aires and the people down here. I feel very, very close to all of them. There has not been one mean thing said or done to me since I got here. They have only accepted us, and taken care of us. An Argentine read some of these reports and emailed to say they were ashamed about what I am seeing down here. My answer is that these are terrible problems you're dealing with. I can't begin to understand them, but you have nothing to be ashamed of. I have been told that quite a few people died today. I don't know if it's true, but my heart is with Argentina. I don't think there will be any more tango on this trip.